I did not become vegan for health
reasons it's a lot easier for me to talk
about my reasons for becoming vegan in
the negative to say I didn't do it for
this reason I didn't for that reason and
if I talk about it positively as I've
said before I feel like it's going to be
a two-hour conversation and that is the
meaningful sense in which veganism is
not just the diet
yes day to day hour an hour the
practical part of being vegan that you
deal with is diet but it connects to a
lot of questions of ethics politics
ecology ultimately personal identity and
belief values really talking about why
you became vegan unpacking what kind of
person you used to be the kind of person
you ended up becoming maybe the kind of
person you aspire to become those are
pretty deep issues and they are attached
to why I'm vegan and I don't know if
that's true for everybody but I think
that's true for a lot of people it's
gonna be true for a lot of people who
end up seeing this video when I first
became strictly vegetarian back in
around the year 2000 um I I think I had
never heard the word vegan spoken out
loud and back then I don't think I'd
ever seen vegan on a menu I can actually
remember clearly the first time someone
said lacto-ovo vegetarian to me and my
reaction was really negative what what's
the point of being vegetarian if you're
gonna eat eggs and cheese and this kind
of you know um back when I was merely
strictly vegetarian I've regarded eggs
as an organ of a chicken's body which it
is um the fact that it can detach from
your body doesn't mean it's not an organ
that develops in your body a lot of
other gross examples of that in the
mammal kingdom but there you go
back when I was only strictly vegetarian
I did regard buying leather as immoral
and was aware both ecologically and
economically that the production of meat
and dairy relies on the leather industry
in terms of profitability
of the the full cycle of the industry as
a whole
leather is one of the high profit items
that keeps the rest of the industry
going that's worth knowing by the way I
mean you may ask yourself how is it
possible that meat production and dairy
production are limping along and asking
for government handouts all the time and
are always saying they're on the verge
of bankruptcy and so on
well the leather industry is not it's a
high profit side of things in terms of
animal exploitation so way back then in
like the year 2000 I regarded all that
stuff as immoral and bad and if anyone
had talked to me about the difference
between ISM and lacto-ovo vegetarians
and I would have said the vegans are 100
percent right I don't think I
encountered veganism like as a really
clear concept until many years later and
of course that portly had to do with
what was going on my life back then and
where I shipped out to so again I don't
know if this is interesting to people or
not but it was also back then year 2001
that I was getting involved with
Buddhism and then I wanted to move to
Cambodia I did end up eventually living
in Cambodia but it wasn't the first
place I moved to in Asia but actually
back already in 2001 and there are
uploads in the internet that prove this
I had the books out from the library for
a teacher self Cambodian I was starting
to read and write pally in ancient dead
language using the Cambodian alphabet
and script I already had those interests
and I was looking for a life that
combined humanitarian interests ethical
interests political interests and
research into ancient Buddhism so again
and just having said that anyone who
knows the Buddhist scene either the
academic scene or the actual religious
scene would realize that I'm alienated
from 99.9 percent of what was going on
so it's basically a positive thing that
I have trouble stating in only a few
words or only a few minutes why I became
vegan because the answer gets into a lot
of relatively deep questions of who I
was and who I wanted to
back in the year 2000 already starting
like 1997 ish I was involved in ecology
including formal political movements for
ecology at City Hall not really at the
provincial or federal level City Hall
was the level of government in Canada
where you could directly take a petition
to government get answers from
government for questions to governments
give depositions get into the paperwork
in the nitty-gritty of a particular
power plant being built of a particular
plan to manage sewage waste water
garbage and that was what I wanted I
wanted to be involved in real politics
not abstract politics not um let's all
sit around and complain until the
revolution comes politics I was very
critical of the vapor of what was going
on in the left-wing in Canada at that
time and I wanted to be involved in
politics that made a difference on a
human level of reality and you know that
could include just changing the plans
for one sewage treatment plant or one
power plant but at least that was
something real instead of I don't know
making speeches about changing the world
and really changing nothing obviously
that same impulse took me from Toronto
to Cambodia and Laos and took me back
again from Cambodia to Saskatchewan to
enroll in First Nations University start
learning Cree and trying to get involved
with indigenous political issues again
on a practical level not on the level of
ideological speechifying um that haven't
been said today in 2015 it's really
common to hear you can't be an ecologist
though being vegan and I think that's
basically true and I think it was
completely inevitable given my interests
already in 1997 in 1999 that I became
vegan or something like it you know soon
thereafter at that time in the year 2000
it's interesting for me to remember I
had no idea that being
vegetarian or vegan was healthier than
eating meat I assumed the opposite and I
could remember talking to people back
then and saying look I'm not trying to
win at the Olympics like if being
vegetarian is worse for me
so what it's worth it's the right thing
to do it's the right thing to do in
terms of ecology in terms of ethics in
terms of all these things you know if
you show me some scientific factoid that
I can benchpress 2% more by eating meat
you know so what this is not the meaning
of life for me and I'm not gonna just
look at some scientific factoid like
that than say okay
I guess all rubber-stamp and cosine the
whole you know meat and dairy industry
these terrible factories were animals
live their whole lives and a concrete
floor without ever seeing the sunshine
and you know die and are eviscerated and
broken into pieces to be purchased in a
plastic wrapper you know to me how
people connect the dots from Oh some
scientific report reports as it's okay
to eat meat to validating that whole
industry that takes a huge leap of
intuition and imagination that I'm not
willing to take and by contrast to start
with my values in terms of caring about
ecology ethics and politics to start
from those and connect the dots to get
to veganism I think is a lot easier a
lot more straightforward so I wanted to
say a few words about what it was that
held me back why I didn't become vegan
earlier in life and in a separate video
link to below sort of the first draft
for this video in the first version I
talked more about the subjective
qualities or psychological qualities
that I have why I ended up taking this
road and you know in a way there's
nothing really terribly deep or profound
about that but whenever we're talking
about ethics and politics there's this
question of once you know what the right
thing to do is will you do the right
thing if you know it will you do it
naturally for a lot of people the story
about becoming vegan is mostly about
finding out
that it's the right thing to do getting
the information their first time seeing
a videotape of what goes on in a
slaughterhouse
their first time learning you know where
milk really comes from and how the dairy
industry works I understand that
so that's they know it and then they do
it but for the vast majority of people
you know meat-eaters etc people who are
compromising people who eat meat but who
tell you oh well I only eat a little bit
and it's kinds of excuses and people who
are trapped in between you know for
millions and millions of people in all
walks of life the problem is they know
what the right thing to do is and they
don't do it they don't take the next
step the logically necessary morally
necessary next step the link between
knowing and feeling is weak for them
like you know to give you an example I'm
not boasting this just part of who I am
I feel revolted by wool and there's
there's nothing disgusting about wool I
mean you look at it at a dead animal
with a bullet hole on its head that's
disgusting on a visceral level but
because I know how wool is made I know
what it is where it comes from that
knowledge changes how I feel for me the
link between knowing and feeling is
really strong and it's not for everybody
all kinds of people can know that
something is the product of torturing
animals or torturing people or you know
genocide or what have you and they don't
feel bad about it they don't feel
differently on the basis of that
knowledge and so then the question of
knowing the right thing to do in
principle and being motivated to
actually do it is very different years
and years ago back when I was studying
moral philosophy because I do have an
education that involves all the big
names in Western philosophy and I went
through all the big heavy books on
European philosophy before I started
working on Buddhism and Asia and
philosophies I used to always say some
of my professors found this sort of
stunning because they hadn't heard it
before I used to say you know the
prospect of ethics relies on there being
a connection between
knowing and feeling if there's no
connection there if you can know
something and it doesn't change how you
feel about something then we're no
longer really talking about ethics so
the purpose of this video of any of
these videos on this YouTube channel is
not to boast about what a wonderful guy
I am because I don't believe a wonderful
guy and these qualities these
characteristics I'm describing I don't
even think they are redeeming qualities
I don't think they're they're viewed
positively in the social context of
Canada in the Year 2015 they're really
not um but I can recognize there are
certain subjective psychological
personal factors that predisposed me to
avoiding some things in life and
engaging deeply with other things in
life that the vast majority of people
just want to avoid thinking about or
recognizing as real or you know
recognizing that they're there
the vast majority people in Canada do
not give a damn about the history of
colonialism and the legal basis for the
land they're sitting on the land they
may own home to me that's surprising I
want to know where things are made and
what they're made of and where they come
from and that was true of me from
childhood I read ingredients on drink
cartons before I knew what any of the
long words meant I was always fascinated
by factories - and how things were made
and where things come from I think a lot
of children are I don't know more than
20% of children have that kind of view
of the world and I was fascinated I mean
with architecture for example I was
fascinated in how things were made and
how they were put together and then
again I had that sensitivity of a really
strong link between knowing and feeling
if I know that something is produced by
genocide and colonialism if I know that
something is produced by skinning a lamb
alive I don't even need to see the
videotape although in that example I
have seen the videotape I have seen
lambs being skinned alive
that's going to change how I feel about
it even though when wool as a finished
product is hanging on a rack it's soft
and it
smells good doesn't smell like a dead
animal it's an appealing final commodity
but I don't just see it in those ways
but look I wanted to include in this
video without it getting too long
what were the other aspects of my
character because again I'm really not
bragging about what kind of guy I am
but the other aspects of my character
that held me back and one aspect of my
character from childhood was the kind of
traditionalism of valuing tradition and
that connected me to ecology in a
positive way but connected me to it
separated me from veganism and
vegetarianism like to give an example
when I was growing up and people said
they needed to eat meat to such an
extent I I can remember saying as a
little kid you know like our
grandparents ate like 10% of the meat
that we now consider normal like our
grandparents generation used to eat
dramatically less meat than we do our
grandparents generation used
dramatically less electricity and they
didn't think they were deprived they
didn't think they were I had a low
quality of life because they use less
electricity you know you know so again
really that makes you a jerk as a kid or
as an adult because you regard the other
people around you as decadent and
self-indulgent and my notion of what was
traditional you know was not
philosophical was put together in a
childish way these little bits and
pieces this awareness that just 100
years ago and of course a thousand years
ago even more so people didn't used to
sleep on a bed they used to be satisfied
to sleep on the floor you know and so on
throughout the human experience people
were not so hung up on the prissy
decadent bourgeois requirements of life
that growing up in downtown Toronto
everyone around me seemed to be obsessed
with and that they were obsessed with to
the exclusion of ethical and political
and philosophical questions that really
did interest me for whatever random
reason and I had to have kind of a
series of realization
you know little things like where I just
realized you know yeah 1,000 years ago
leather was a crucial part of our
culture but today it's obsolete today
when you see a serious mountaineering
team going up a mountain none of their
gear is made of leather the gloves
aren't made of leather nothing else is
the military equipment used today they
don't even make the boots out of leather
you know US army boots you can take a
look how they've changed you know yeah
that was something humans needed to do
survive a thousand years ago not anymore
a wool I actually had a wonderful
experience in Scotland visiting a wool
farm where you know I mean it's it's
kind of funny because you're only seeing
one stage of the industry you're not
seeing the sheep getting shorn and
you're not seeing them getting their
throats cut or anything else but I can
remember being out in the mountains in
Scotland and seeing these beautiful
happy animals that come up to you and
you know want to spend time with you and
as deserve as a child I thought about
wool as something that connected me in a
positive way
to a traditional aspect of human culture
that I didn't want to lose contact with
but again my mind simply had to change
about that I simply had to recognize
yeah a thousand years ago that was true
and now it's an excuse and it's an
excuse for something terrible for a
compromise I don't want to make and that
nobody wants to make so yeah that's a
shorthand for it I mean that really for
me was the breaking point I comment in
the earlier video for me it wasn't the
taste of meat it didn't give a damn the
vast majority of meat tasted horrible to
me growing up as a kid instinct truly I
found meat revolting I found eggs
revolting I found any dairy product that
actually tasted like dairy revolting and
and I just never was the kind of person
who thought that my own short term
pleasure justified doing something
immoral so you know again really doesn't
make me a nice guy if anything it makes
me a bit of an uncompromising jerk
but I thought that kind of tradition was
really worth something and I was wrong
and when I figured that out which really
was kind of the last step towards
becoming strictly vegetarian eventually
becoming vegan that was sad for me
because I was kind of looking back on
the history of Western civilization and
seeing even more of it as worthless and
a lie and execute because you know you
already look back on warfare and think
yeah we had these excuses for why
warfare was good and now I reject them
and warfare is bad we had all these
excuses for why slavery was good now we
look back on it and slavery is bad and
you know to look back on the material
culture of human civilization and think
all of this was an error you know for
thousands of years people thought that
alcohol made them happy and now you look
back and you say well alcohol causes
brain damage here in Canada our first
nations one of the one of the few things
that's true almost coast-to-coast the
vast majority of our native people you
know their main drug was tobacco you
know tobacco use was a huge part of the
religion and secular life really getting
high using tobacco was a paper well now
we've done a lot of scientific research
on what the real effects of tobacco are
on the brain and you got to look back on
that and say oh this was all an error
you know so I just say that was a sad
and sobering thought and I guess that
was kind of the last tether that was
slowing me down